Dear God, when I skip a stone across a lake  
Why does it dance merrily on the water surface for a while  
Only to drown in its endless depths ultimately?  

Instead, why does not it ascend upwards with a purpose  
Into the heavens of the sky and roam the upper abodes?  
Was its fate 'just to be a stone'?  

Dear God, is my fate just to be a stone too?  
Am I only to skip across this tiny rock that we call Earth  
Until it is time for me to go where all dead people go?  
Where do they go anyway?  

But dear God, I don’t feel that’s our truth.  
It’s not true when I look up at the sky dotted  
with a million brilliant stars   
and it’s definitely not true  

When I look into the eyes of a puppy,  
When I see two lovers snuggled on a beach basked in the dazzling sunset,  
When I come across a group of friends in the park, reliving all those they memories they lived together  
Laughing so loud that the entire world wants to join in.  

It’s during times like these I know that you aren’t far away  
You must be close by for such magical things to happen  
So why aren’t you close by   

When there are people being murdered and children being raped  
When men are dying and tortured in a bloody war  
Or simply when I’m having a bad day and there’s no one to console me  
And tell me it will all be okay?  

Dear God, do you see all the violence and atrocities of this Earth?  
There are people crying for your help,  
How can you turn a blind eye?  

Dear God, do you hear me?  
Are you coming to save your little world  
because it’s suffocating and dying like a little flower starved of air  

Are these words going somewhere meaningful  
Or is their fate only to live in this piece of paper till they go  
Where all paper goes when it dies?  

***



### Note
I had initially recorded this poem on a paper. So I uh &mdash; guess no? Safe to say that I would write this poem *very* differently now.
