I am always captivated by the beauty of this universe. Everything from the genius engineering of cars, to the rich cultural history of the various societies that have lived on this planet, to the mysterious particles that seem to govern reality. And speaking of reality—what is that thing anyway?  

There are many times when I experience this sensation of floating in a magical ocean, riding waves which wash over my entire body leaving goosebumps in their wake. And I always experience such a moment whenever I come across something beautiful, either physical or abstract. These beautiful things often have one thing in common—information. This information all connects together to form an abstract idea of the object—and when I look at that complex yet elegant spiderweb of nodes and branches, my heart is filled with the deepest of satisfaction. I know that each bridge and ball mean something, and they all come together to form a masterpiece.

I have always been fascinated by film and fiction, especially superhero ones in which the protagonist manages to do something exceptional, despite it being seemingly impossible. Iron Man with his crazy suites, Bat Man with his magical gadgets and so on. These works seem to tease me; they show all the amazing things that we can achieve, if only we work ‘hard’. Therefore, this has been a central question in my life: how far can we go? It is physically possible for me to see Jupiter in my lifetime but if I were to mention this to the common layperson, they would laugh in my face and call me crazy. This has therefore been the driving factor of my life: to push myself and see how far I can go. Can I really be a superhero?  

And I don’t think it is just me wondering this; I am sure everybody goes through these kinds of feelings multiple times in their lives. The thing is, it is really hard to keep going man. Our heart dreams up all these fantasies which we can make reality if only we work hard, but an incredibly large proportion of the times we end up failing because success is not easy. These failures can be devastating, especially if you worked very hard and gave it your all. When times like these inevitably come around, we are attacked with the question: will we never be able to do magical things no matter how hard we try? And the more times you fail and are forced to face this question, the harder it is for you to say no. And once you sufficiently doubt the answer, or give in completely, all aspirations go out of the window.

Overtime people give up trying to achieve something truly beautiful, something they can truly be proud of. Some just give up, block it all out and get on with life, while others start looking for validation from others. In the latter case, people start trying to fit in with society and do stuff like getting into religion. I guess we feel a bit safe when everyone around us acts and talks the way we do.  

At this point, you just accept that this is how life is. You completely forget about the infinite beauty of this universe and become busy with day-to-day matters. When a younger boy comes around, you tell him, “No, those are just dreams. Reality doesn’t work like that. You are naïve.”   

Chasing after your dreams is really hard. It requires a lot of hard work. The monsters of confusion will meet you at every bend in the road. It is your duty to keep your head up and keep walking. Whenever doubt runs across your mind, just look up at the sky, and look behind into the past. All doubt will be erased.  

The ship is waiting at the dock. Waiting for you to embark on an epic journey. The Universe is beckoning you forward. Your heart will guide you on your pilgrimage. The most powerful weapons you have are your courage and your unwavering devotion. Courage to keep going, trusting yourself that you will someday make it and unwavering devotion to the beauty of the universe. You only have one life. Make it count.   

This is a letter to the future me. If someday I do end up giving it all up, the current me is curious to see what the future me has to say about this.     
