“What is the meaning of life?”  

This is a question which I am sure has been asked by countless bearded middle-aged men since ages, and you don’t need me to emphasize the importance of it. But they were not the last ones to ponder on this of course, it is a question we still ask every day in our lives. Everything in one’s life is based heavily on what they think is the answer to this question. It is central to every decision we take, and every choice we make.  

It seems like there are too many factors which can determine a person’s outlook on life. There are social ones such as their cultural upbringing and their relationships with others, but there are also biological factors — especially those concerned with the brain — which are likely to play a role, though we don’t yet know their significance. Therefore, it seems hopeless that we can make a sweeping generalization of what everyone’s meaning should be. But the great leaps in the knowledge of any field (progress in Science is a great example of this) come from generalizations, and so it is not at all unexpected that the answer to this question is one too. And I think I found it. Though the form in which I now write the answer is new, I am convinced that deep down, many already knew it to be true.    

“To create beautiful art in any field that you pursue.”  

What I wrote above is pretty self-explanatory. However, it is indeed an important question as to what can be considered ‘beautiful art’. Compared to many other fields, it is easiest to show what is beauty in Science; it is the truth. Now I want to make it clear that I am not saying that Nature always chooses the most beautiful solution to any problem (which I think is what Paul Dirac argues), rather that the beauty in correct theories (Quantum Theory for example) comes from them actually working. That is, we can use this knowledge to create things (like Computers for example). David Deutsch, the author of the philosophical masterpiece book ‘The Beginning of Infinity (2012)’, would call such explanations (or knowledge) as having great reach (equivalently, power).  

What is beauty in more aesthetic fields such as Music or Literature? Pierro Scaruffi, the Italian polymath who is the owner of the terrific website scaruffi.com, argues that good Music is new Music. That is, a piece of good Music is nothing like what came before it; it will appear alien to you at first glance. It says something completely new and different. But one might say something like, “I just listen to music which makes me feel good. Why should I care about these definitions? They are superficial. And also, this is your definition of good music, it is only your opinion. Everyone has their own opinions about what is good art.”  

A friend once asked me, “Is that all we are?” in response to my telling him of what I conjectured to be the meaning of our lives. Isn’t it sort of dull? The only thing meaningful in our lives is to create new things according some definition that I have just given; the emotional aspect of life seems to have been destroyed.  Let me tell you a story:  

It is incredible that we live in a Universe that is explicable. That means a Universe in which cause and effect make sense. As David Deutsch argues convincingly in his book ‘The Beginning of Infinity’, we live a world where though problems are inevitable (that is, new problems will always come up), all problems are soluble; it is only a matter of time. It is just as incredible that we humans are able to argue logically and create new knowledge, in all conceivable fields (science, politics, philosophy). Deutsch calls such beings (we fall into this category and sentient aliens too if they exist) as Universal Constructors. This is because evolution seemingly crossed a critical boundary when we originated as a new species. A new species who could construct new knowledge through conjecture and criticism. This knowledge gave them power. They just didn’t eat and reproduce. With the help of such abstract stories (knowledge), they built towers of steel and even walked on the round white ball we see every day in the night sky. We are special in this way, and it is what I have been trying to convey through all my essays and poems on this website.  

And I strongly believe that this ability to create isn’t just limited to the rational arts such as science, politics, and philosophy. We have this ability to convey profound themes and create beauty through fiction, music, movies, architecture et cetera. Whenever one creates a new piece of art, they are bringing something new into the universe which wouldn’t have existed without them. And when that piece of art is beautiful, it can have profound impact on our lives. That is, it has power to truly inspire.   

Our day-to-day life seems very hectic and confusing. Everything that happens in the world feels meaningless. It seems like nothing is going anywhere. It seems like whatever we do with our lives, we don’t make any difference. Perhaps that’s why the band ‘King Crimson’ claimed that “confusion will be my epitaph” in their stunning song Epitaph (1969)! But you have to remember that probably even Newton felt the same about his own life and you are left to decide whether his life was meaningless. In times like these, when you take a step back and see the big picture, you will see the truth. The truth about our power and potential, which Deutsch calls Reach.  

Now it sort of becomes obvious why I conjectured the answer to the question of the meaning of our lives to be so. When we zoom out on the spatial and temporal scale of the Universe, it is clear that we are very special creatures. And when we look behind into history, we are reminded of how far we have come. We have been given hands of magic. Hands which can create seemingly everything from machines of metal to musical masterpieces.  

Therefore, to pursue the creation of knowledge not just in empirical fields such as Science and Politics, but also in all the fine arts is the noblest thing one can do. To seek after truth and beauty in all fields is the only thing that truly matters.   

I will now pause for a moment to say that I have not said everything that I want to say about emotions. I will discuss that in a future essay, although the general idea has been hinted here.  

From this perspective, it is now easy to eliminate subjectivity in art; let us take the example of Music. Good Music is new Music. It is an exalting experience to come across something new, something you never even thought possible. To me, to argue for subjectivity in music (that is, the arguments that ‘what feels good is different for everyone’) reminds me an awful lot about the case of Spirituality. Both are concerned about feelings only and never step out of that realm. As opposed to that, when you zoom out and observe, Science and good Art have changed the world. The world has been very different after the days of Newton, and very different after the days of Franz Kafka. On the other hand, I don't think humans from a few thousand years later will attatch any weight to Buddha's life.
