Something incredible happened in Ancient Greece, specifically Athens, in the last few centuries of the Before Common Era: a new culture emerged—one based on conjecture and criticism. Suddenly, it was believed that knowledge could be created by formulating propositions (theories) about the world and subjecting them to rigorous scrutiny; that we can actually get somewhere by just thinking carefully about our problems (contrary to what my mother thinks—she (and Mark Manson also?) thinks we’ll just go crazy). Everything about the world which was taken to be true was questioned, regardless of who said it and what their status (or ‘clout’) was, and anything without a good reason was simply discarded. This culture of open criticism was later largely responsible for The Enlightenment two thousand years, the revolution which transformed everything in our lives.  

An authoritarian system of knowledge, by definition, allows no room for criticism: here, knowledge is accepted as true because someone important said it, rather it being an actual true description about the world. Since with enough time and effort any true statement about the world can be verified by anyone, any authoritarian system which condemns criticism is clearly hiding something: because if it was true, what is there to fear? What it is hiding is that on some level, it is based on irrationality. That means that there are propositions which have no good reasons backing them up. But what constitutes a good reason? A good reason is a hard to vary explanation (see ‘Chapter One: The Reach of Explanations, The Beginning of Infinity’ for details) for which no satisfactory counter-argument has been found. But why would anyone ever subscribe to an authoritarian system of knowledge? Let me illustrate it through the example of one of the most popular such system: Religion.  

Why does one believe in God? This question has always fascinated me, because there are so many different reasons people have! For starters, some believe in God as the explanation for all the beauty and harmony (for example life emerging on Earth, elegance of mathematics) in the Universe. Some others take God as an explanation for the exalting/spiritual experiences (which I think is just some wild chemical stuff happening in the brain) that they have. But by far, and this is increasingly the main motivator as people age, the most popular reason to believe in God is a means for closure—or piece of mind.  

(Footnote: typically, any person believing in God believes in an incredibly complex and unhealthy mix of all these; but closure is what really keeps them hooked.)  

Life can get real ugly at times. There will be moments when you will feel overwhelmed, when you will consciously or subconsciously desperately search for a quick way out of the crushing and tormenting pain. Religion is the solution that is the most enticing for a lot of people—to sell yourself a very fake idea of reality in an attempt to relieve the pain. Different religions do this in different ways. Christianity and Islam propose the existence of an all-powerful God who has complete and utter control of your life, and whom you should try to please by following a set of rules. If you impress him, he just might reward you. You are basically begging like a dog for some apparently petty supernatural being. Eastern Religions like Hinduism and Buddhism propose the existence of fate and Karma. Your sufferings and happinesses have all been predetermined, nothing is in your control, you can’t do anything about it no matter how hard you try, and the best you can do is to satisfy your karma (destiny) diligently. Karma which accumulates over past lives is essentially the process of repenting for your sins (which furthers the feeling that you can’t do anything to help your current situation, it is something completely beyond your control) and if you repent for all your sins (and don’t commit any more), you achieve the state of Parinirvana: release from this horrible cycle of pain and suffering.  

So, the way that the vast majority of people deal with pain in their lives is to first convince themselves of a very fake reality (it’s the first instinct: when people are younger they cry for their mother to comfort and tell them everything will be alright, when people are older they cry for God) which gives them closure (makes them feel safe) and releases them from the pain—well, that’s the plan anyway.  
(Footnote: a large number of people who consider themselves atheists are also guilty of this—more on this later)   
The shocking truth of the matter is that if you don’t solve problems (and keep doing random rituals with wishful thinking), problems don’t get solved. So people who sell themselves this fake world end up never escaping it — the pain will stay forever until you remove it.  It is the most addictive and destructive drug ever—by far.  

As for why God doesn’t exist: all descriptions of God are bad explanations (easy to vary/no good reason for why something exists/no evidence) and all physical consequences of every religious theory have repeatedly been proven false (nonexistence of hell for example; of course, religious theories being bad explanations will just be given a small nudge so it fits reality). It is now clear how the concept of God has historically emerged and what is happening psychologically when people believe in God and we see it is only a result of desperation. Of course, I never can prove that God doesn’t exist just like how I can’t prove that there isn’t a group of turtles with giant dicks duct-taped to their backs floating somewhere in the universe.   

(Footnote: There is also another reason why people believe in God, and it is that that it promotes good virtues. But at that point why do you even have to believe in God to be virtuous? You don’t need to be convinced of the existence of a supernatural being just to help someone out. If anything, helping someone so you will be sent to heaven is the one which is selfish and messed up. Just be a good person bro)  

Religion never allowed for criticism at the dinner table: that is, you could never talk critically about the concept of God with fellow believers because only the great spiritual masters know what God truly is and we just have to follow them as we are clueless imbeciles (another way of furthering powerlessness). And if one were to discuss about Religion with these so-called spiritual masters, they would always give bad explanations. That is when they would make physical statements about the world, they would not be testable or downright false (Sadhguru with Mercury), and when they make philosophical statements about the world, they would be very easy-to-vary and vague (Sadhguru’s twitter posts, which can be interpreted in myriad different ways).   

Anyhow, people have always realised that this is what is truly going on when people believe in God, and this has been depicted in some beautiful art pieces over the years. And once the truth is found, it is only a matter before it convinces everybody (just like how now pretty much everyone thinks that slavery is bad, or that the Earth is a sphere). With time along with Religion, every authoritarian system of knowledge began to collapse for precisely the reason that it doesn’t make logical sense. This sentiment exploded with the turn of the 20st century with vast shifts in western culture, particularly among the youth (I am not entirely sure of the reason but I think vast advances in science (especially physics) convinced people that there are many things we don’t know (as compared to the ancients who thought they knew everything) and they began exploring and experimenting what it means to be human). Suddenly, beautiful literature depicted society in its rawest form from the works of Franz Kafka all the way till Gabriel García Márquez—and beyond (I totally did not mention just these two authors because I only read their books btw).   

The culture grew even richer with the rise of American counter-culture of the 60s (Gravity’s Rainbow by Thomas Pynchon) and the emergence of rock music: Velvet Underground depicting urban teenage life with all of the insecurities, sex fantasies and psychedelic adventures of the youth; Faust with German Krautrock illustrating the confusion and meaninglessness of life emphasising just how much of a mess and goofy everything is while simultaneously echoing the fear of nuclear apocalypse prevalent at the time; Pere Ubu and the new wave gave further vent to the fragility, isolation, exploitation of the American industrial schizophrenic youth. The complexity of the human was suddenly painted by artistic masterpieces.   

This paradigm shift of culture echoed in every aspect of life. There were all kinds of social movements. People of all genders, races and ages began to be seen equally; it was a weird time in history of human civilization when an 18-year-old black man could call a 80-year-old white president retarded. People just didn’t believe in things without logic (at least not in God and tradition) anymore. They questioned everything and let themselves experience life in its rawest form: doing drugs and hooking up and other things which were earlier considered taboo.   

(Footnote: This culture has slowly been taking over third world countries like India with time as well and pretty much already has in the cities)  

20th century also saw massive leaps in technology, culminating with the advent of modern computers and the internet which connected many millions of people across the world in real time. The number only increased to billions in the 21st century and the internet exploded like the Hiroshima bomb with new platforms such as YouTube, Instagram and Tik-Tok connecting everyone on the globe in a mind-bogglingly complex net. Suddenly, everybody was all fragile, insecure and broken and they were all connected to each other.  

Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004) was really a sign-of-the-times movie which depicted all this fragility that I’ve been talking about. It is a very accurate representation of the life and attitude of the everyone these days, not just the youth. Life seems all hopeless and depressing and the world just seems to be one broken primate interacting with another, all in a desperate attempt to feel safe in a harsh world. When I asked a friend what he thought the future was going to look like, he told me that he thinks that the world will become increasingly ‘plastic’. Like the people in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind we will just keep erasing our mind to escape the pain, and like the people in Brave New World we’ll just keep shooting ourselves with drugs to suspend ourselves in a permanent state of superficial chemical bliss; people can never fix their problems and find a way to escape them and they will never find true happiness.   

But as I mentioned in a footnote earlier, the same thing is happening in this case as with Religion. These atheists have convinced themselves that nothing will get better to escape the discomfort of doubt that maybe there is something you can do to make life better.  
(Footnote: although they are not nearly as guilty as the theists, the solution is not too obvious here see Purpose (essay) and Happiness ≠ happiness (essay))  
And even if the solution to their problems is revealed, people are hesitant (though they ultimately will) to adopt it as the new is scary and unfamiliar. It is apparently better to live in a hell you know, than a world you don’t know — a world which might be better. Humans have always been cautious and afraid of the new and unfamiliar and it has always been easier to stay safe where you already were. But change can only take place if you are brave enough to face the unknown, and it has always been that way. Change is the only way forward. And with enough time, people have always been brave. The truth always had the power to change to world, and lies (no matter how sweet) never did.  

In the words of the Catholic Bishop Robert Barron in a recent reel (idk man twitter ads keep hitting me with his stuff), “Do you know how our culture puts such a premium now on safety, doesn't it? Safe spaces and keeping us safe and 'I'm being threatened and that's threatening my safety’. Well, look, I mean, I get it. We all want to be safe. It's a value. But can I suggest to you that a religion that puts before our eyes a man pinned to a cross is not a religion putting a high priority on safety. The saints don’t strike me as people that were really big on safety. Rather find your mission. Let Christ come to life in you, set your heart on fire. Become in some way — and look, it's different for every one of us, because the Lord gave us distinctive gifts and a distinctive experience and background. We're meant to carry his love into the world in some distinctive way. And then you'll know who you are. Do your mission, you'll find joy, and you'll transfigure the world. God bless you all."
