AI (not AGI) could be one of the best and the most significant thing that has happened to art in its entire history. It is the first time art is being automated at a very large scale. The last time something similar happened - that being advent of photography- it forced visual artists to venture and explore uncharted territory, to create and develop new styles. 

Side Note: Caligraphy was probably a significant art form too before the emergence of the printing press, but now has been relegated to a very humble status. 

Of course the initial reaction of everybody to any sort of automation - and this is true for whenever it has happened in the past, viz washing machines etc- is to shut it down. There is a nice movie about this—The Man in the White Suit. But nobody could ever suppress automation, because humans are more than their machines, they are meant to evolve and move on. Societies which embraced automation progressed, redistributing their human resources to perform more sophisticated tasks, and a result, quality of life improved. Societies which didn't (maybe USSR, because adopting automation goes against the spirit of communism), collapsed as a result.

Similarly, AI has forced (and will increasingly continue to force) artists to create something beyond that which can be automated. For example many posters, website UIs (and much more in visual arts which I am sure I am forgetting), and hell even reels are being made by AI. Slowly artists will find something new, and the most pressure is right now on the visual artists as they're being replaced the fastest.

The beautiful part of all this is that during this transition, people will be forced to confront what good art is - what is worth working on - what is worth even creating - what is the role of an artist -  and everyone (like the masses) could converge faster onto the Scaruffian definition. Just imagine what a groundbreaking leap that would be. Suddenly the intolerance for bad art, and hence bad explanations, will surge incredibly. This could even spark off a similar revolution in moral philosophy (what is even worth pursuing in life), and since such a revolution will increase cooperation among individuals (assuming my moral philosophy is right), this could cause a similar revolution in politics.

What a world that would be! It is hard to imagine what it would even look like! For example, the number of suicides could drop to near zero and perhaps people will look back on the early 21st century as a very dark period of depression. This is big, very big.

This is definitely the future, and the only question that remains is how much will AI nudge the world into the world into this insane transformation? Is it powerful enough to displace enough of the bad art to surmount the activation energy of a societal reaction, one that will transform the world into a much more beautiful place, and people will look back and wonder... how could we have ever even lived like that?
